---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.14.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Intro to Machine Learning: Evaluation


This week we are going to start learning about machine learning.

We are going to do this by looking at how to tell if machine learning has worked.

This is because:
- you have to check if one worked after you build one
- if you do not check carefully, it might only sometimes work
- gives you a chance to learn *only* evaluation instead of evaluation + an ML task


We are going to do this by auditing an algorithm that was built with machine learning.  

## What is ML?

First, what is an Algorithm?

> An algorithm is a set of ordered steps to complete a task.

Note that when people outside of CS talk about algorithms that impact people's lives these are often *not written directly by people* anymore.  THey are often the result of machine learning.

In machine learning, people write an algorithm for how to write an algorithm based on data.  This often comes in the form of a statitistical model of some sort

<!-- (eg AOC in Congress; the Twitter algorithm; etc)
 -->


When we *do* machine learning, this can also be called:
- data mining
- pattern recognition
- modeling

because we are looking for patterns in the data and typically then planning to
use those patterns to make predictions or automate a task.  

Each of these terms does have slightly different meanings and usage, but
sometimes they're used close to exchangeably.


## Evaluating Algorithms: Propublica's COMPAS Audit


We are going to replicate the audit from ProPublica [Machine Bias](https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing)


Propublica started the COMPAS Debate with the article [Machine Bias](https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencin).  With their article, they also released details of their methodology and their [data and code](https://github.com/propublica/compas-analysis).  This presents a real data set that can be used for research on how data is used in a criminal justice setting without researchers having to perform their own requests for information, so it has been used and reused a lot of times.




## Propublica COMPAS Data

The dataset consists of COMPAS scores assigned to defendants over two years 2013-2014 in Broward County, Florida, it was released by Propublica in a [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/propublica/compas-analysis/). These scores are determined by a proprietary algorithm designed to evaluate a persons recidivism risk - the likelihood that they will reoffend. Risk scoring algorithms are widely used by judges to inform their sentencing and bail decisions in the criminal justice system in the United States.

The journalists collected, for each person arreste din 2013 and 2014:
- basic demographics
- details about what they were charged with and priors
- the COMPAS score assigned to them
- if they had actually been re-arrested within 2 years of their arrest

This means that we have what the COMPAS algorithm predicted (in the form of a score from 1-10) and what actually happened (re-arrested or not). We can then measure how well the algorithm worked, in practice, in the real world.  


```{code-cell} ipython3
import pandas as pd
from sklearn import metrics
import seaborn as sns
```

We're going to work with a cleaned copy of the data released by Propublica that also has a minimal subset of features.

```{code-cell} ipython3
compas_clean_url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ml4sts/outreach-compas/main/data/compas_c.csv'
compas_df = pd.read_csv(compas_clean_url,index_col = 'id')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
compas_df.head()
```

Here is an explanation of these features:

* `age`: defendant's age
* `c_charge_degree`: degree charged (Misdemeanor of Felony)
* `race`: defendant's race
* `age_cat`: defendant's age quantized in "less than 25", "25-45", or "over 45"
* `score_text`: COMPAS score: 'low'(1 to 5), 'medium' (5 to 7), and 'high' (8 to 10).
* `sex`: defendant's gender
* `priors_count`: number of prior charges
* `days_b_screening_arrest`: number of days between charge date and arrest where defendant was screened for compas score
* `decile_score`: COMPAS score from 1 to 10 (low risk to high risk)
* `is_recid`: if the defendant recidivized
* `two_year_recid`: if the defendant within two years
* `c_jail_in`: date defendant was imprisoned
* `c_jail_out`: date defendant was released from jail
* `length_of_stay`: length of jail stay



## One-hot Encoding

We will audit first to see how good the algorithm is by treating the predictions as either high or not high.  One way we can get to that point is to transform the `score_text` column from one column with three values, to 3 binary columns.

```{code-cell} ipython3
compas_df = pd.get_dummies(compas_df,columns=['score_text'])
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
compas_df.head()
```
Note the last 3 columns


## Performance Metrics in sklearn

The first thing we usually check is the accuracy: the percentage of all samples that are correct.  

```{code-cell} ipython3
metrics.accuracy_score(compas_df['two_year_recid'],compas_df['score_text_High'])
```

````{margin}
```{note}
the wikipedia page for confusion matrix is a really good reference
```
````
However this does not tell us anything about what *types* of mistakes the algorithm made.  The type of mistake often matters in terms of how we trust or deploy an algorithm.  We use a [confusion matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confusion_matrix) to describe the performance in more detail.



A confusion matrix counts the number of samples of each *true* category that wre predicted to be in each category. In this case we have a binary prediction problem: people either are re-arrested (truth) or not and were given a high score or not(prediction).  In binary problems we adopt a common language of labeling one outcome/predicted value positive and the other negative.  We do this not based on the social value of the outcome, but on the numerical encoding.  

In this data, being re-arrested is indicated by a 1 in the `two_year_recid` column, so this is the *positive class* and not being re-arrested is 0, so the *negative class*.  Similarly a high score is 1, so that's the *positive prediction* and not high is 0, so that is the a *negative prediction*.  

```{note}
these terms can be used in any sort of detection problem, whether machine learning is used or not
```

`sklearn.metrics` provides a `[confusion matrix](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.confusion_matrix.html)` function that we can use.
```{code-cell} ipython3
metrics.confusion_matrix(compas_df['two_year_recid'],compas_df['score_text_High'])
```

Since this is binary problem we have 4 possible outcomes:
- true negatives($C_{0,0}$): did not get a high score and were not re-arrested
- false negatives($C_{1,0}$):: did not get a high score and were re-arrested
- false positives($C_{0,1}$):: got a high score and were not re-arrested
- true positives($C_{1,1}$):: got a high score and were re-arrested


With these we can revisit accuracy:

$$ A = \frac{C_{0,0} + C_{1,1}}{C_{0,0}+ C_{1,0} + C_{0,1} + C_{1,1}} $$


and we can define new scores. Two common ones in CS are recall and precision.

Recall is:

$$ R = \frac{C_{1,1}}{C_{1,0} + C_{1,1}} $$

```{code-cell} ipython3
metrics.recall_score(compas_df['two_year_recid'],compas_df['score_text_High'])
```
That is, among the truly positive class how many were correctly predicted?  In COMPAS, it's the percentage of the re-arrested people who got a high score.


Precision is
$$ P = \frac{C_{1,1}}{C_{0,1} + C_{1,1}} $$


```{code-cell} ipython3
metrics.precision_score(compas_df['two_year_recid'],compas_df['score_text_High'])
```

That is, among the positive predictions, what percentage was correct.  In COPMAS, that is among the people who got a high score, what percentage were re-arrested.  

```{code-cell} ipython3

```

```{code-cell} ipython3

```

## Questions after class

All were clarifying details that I expanded above.
