---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.14.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Reading Docstrings, Object Inspection, and Loading Data

## Programming is a Practice


Python has a `print` function and we can use the help in jupyter to learn about
how to use it in different ways.

Given this code excerpt, how could you print out "Sarah_Brown"?
```{code-cell} ipython3
first = 'Sarah'
last = 'Brown'
```

We can print the docstring out, as a whole instead of using the shfit + tab to view it.
```{code-cell} ipython3
help(print)
```

The first line says that it can take multiple values, because it says `value, ..., sep`

It also has a
keyword argument (must be used like `argument=value` and has a default) described as  `sep=' '`.
This means that by default it adds a space as above.

```{code-cell} ipython3
print(first,last)
```


```{code-cell} ipython3
print(first,last,sep='_')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
type(first)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
def compute_grade(num_level1,num_level2,num_level3):
    '''
    Computes a grade for CSC/DSP310 from numbers of achievements at each level

    Parameters:
    ------------
    num_level1 : int
      number of level 1 achievements earned
    num_level2 : int
      number of level 2 achievements earned
    num_level3 : int
      number of level 3 achievements earned

    Returns:
    --------
    letter_grade : string
      letter grade with modifier (+/-)
    '''
    if num_level1 == 15:
        if num_level2 == 15:
            if num_level3 == 15:
                grade = 'A'
            elif num_level3 >= 10:
                grade = 'A-'
            elif num_level3 >=5:
                grade = 'B+'
            else:
                grade = 'B'
        elif num_level2 >=10:
            grade = 'B-'
        elif num_level2 >=5:
            grade = 'C+'
        else:
            grade = 'C'
    elif num_level1 >= 10:
        grade = 'C-'
    elif num_level1 >= 5:
        grade = 'D+'
    elif num_level1 >=3:
        grade = 'D'
    else:
        grade = 'F'


    return grade
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
type(compute_grade)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
help(compute_grade())
```

### Why inspection in code?
Some IDEs give you GUI based tools to inspect objects. We are going to do it programmatically inline with our analyses for two reasons.

(minor, logistical) it helps make for good notes
(most importantly) it helps build habits of data science



### Investigating how doc strings work

We can see how the docstring impacts help and how exactly it has to be formatted to become a docstring

```{code-cell} ipython3
def ex_1(a):
    print(a)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
help(ex_1())
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
def ex_2(a):
    #nis htis a docstring?
    print(a)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
help(ex_2())
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
def ex_3(a):
    ''' this is a docstring'''
    #nis htis a docstring?
    print(a)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
help(ex_3())
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
def ex_4(a):
    """this is a docstring"""
    #nis htis a docstring?
    print(a)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
help(ex_4())
```

```{tip}
In python, [PEP 257](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/) says how to write a docstring, but it is very broad.

In Data Science, [numpydoc](https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html) style docstrings are popular.

- [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) [follows numpydoc](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/development/contributing_docstring.html)
- [Numpy uses it]
- [Scipy](https://scipy.org/) [follows numpydoc](https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html#docstring-standard)
```



## Coffee Data


Structured data is easier to work with than other data.

We're going to focus on tabular data for now. At the end of the course, we'll examine images, which are structured, but more complex and text, which is much less structured.

We're going to use a dataset about [coffee quality](https://github.com/jldbc/coffee-quality-database/) today.

````{margin}
```{important}
It's important to always know where data came from and how it was collected.

This helps you know what is is useful for and what its limitations are.

An important research article on documenting datasets for machine learning is called [Datasheets for Datasets](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/datasheets-for-datasets/) these researchers also did a [follow up study](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/understanding-machine-learning-practitioners-data-documentation-perceptions-needs-challenges-and-desiderata/) to better understand how practitioner use datasheets and decide how to use data.
```
```{note}
If this type of research is interesting to you, let me know!
```
````


How was this dataset collected?
- reviews added to DB
- then scraped

Where did it come from?
- coffee Quality Institute's trained reviewers.

what format is it provided in?
- csv (Comma Separated Values)

what other information is in this repository?
- the code to scrape and clean the data
- the data before cleaning
+++


## Getting the direct data URL

<iframe src="https://scribehow.com/embed/Get_a_datafile_from_GitHub__W8QQLpLgQ_WGv6Tp77pbCg" width="640" height="640" allowfullscreen frameborder="0"></iframe>


We'll save that url as a variable to work with it.

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_data_url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jldbc/coffee-quality-database/master/data/arabica_data_cleaned.csv'
```


````{margin}
```{admonition} Further Reading
[the pandas package overview](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/getting_started/overview.html) can be a good read if reading more about things helps you understand
```
````


## Loading in Data


We will use a library called Pandas
```{code-cell} ipython3
import pandas as pd
```

- the `import` keyword is used for loading packages
- `pandas` is the name of the package that is installed
- `as` keyword allows us to assign an alias (nickname)
- `pd` is the typical alias for pandas

We can read data in using the read csv file
```{code-cell} ipython3
pd.read_csv(coffee_data_url)
```

This read in the data and prints it out because it is the last line on the cell.
If we do something else after, it will read it in, but not print it out

```{code-cell} ipython3
pd.read_csv(coffee_data_url)

print(first)
```

In order to use it, we save the output to a variable.

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_data = pd.read_csv(coffee_data_url)
```

Then we can check the type.

```{code-cell} ipython3
type(coffee_data)
```

This is a new type that is provided by the pandas library.  Notice this uses the full libary name, not the alias, because this comes from the code for the library itself, not our current code where pandas as a nickname.


```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df = pd.read_csv(coffee_data_url)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df
```

If you're curious about something, try it out, see what happens.  We're going to use a lot of code inspection tools during class.  These are helpful both for understanding what's going on, but the advantage to knowing how to get this information programmatically even though a different IDE would give you inspection tools  is that it helps you treat your code as data.


## Good Code is always relative

```{important}
I added this section as notes, that was not in class today.  I said similar things last week, but this includes more references and context.
```

In programming for data science, we are often trying to tell a story.  

```{admonition} Try it yourself
:class: tip
How might this goal change your code for this class relative to other code
you have written or could imagine writing?
```

Python is a fully [open source project](https://www.python.org/downloads/source/)
and as such is governed by [community](https://www.python.org/community/) [standards](https://www.python.org/psf/conduct/) and [conventions](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/).

```{admonition} Try it yourself
:class: tip
Find PEP8 (note that following it is part of earning python achievements)
```

The [documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/) for the full language is online too.


Guido van Rossum was the first main developer and wrote [essays](https://www.python.org/doc/essays/) about python too.


it's [pretty popular](https://www.python.org/about/quotes/)

## Questions After Class


### About the Course

#### Will we further go over how to achieve level 3 achievements with more specificity?

Right now, you are still only able to earn level 1s and then with assignment 2 you can start earning level 2s.  After that, it will make morse sense to be able to talk about portfolios.

#### How do portfolio checks work?

At a logistical level, you add files to your portfolio repository by a specific check date and then I grade them.  

#### how much stats will we do in this class?
Only a little bit.  We wil do some modeling of data and compute basic statistics, but we will not cover the underlying concepts of statistics, much.  However if you know some statistics, you will be able to extend what we cover to use them.

#### Is there a rate at which we need to complete skill checks if we fall behind?

Follow the table on the Achievements page for which assignments and portfolio checks have which achievements eligible. Some assignments you can earn only 1-2 achievements others you can earn 4-5 level 2s.  It is not recommended that you skip early chances because there are future chances, though.  However, sometimes if you have an achievement already you can skip a section of an assignment.

### About Jupyter

#### Can you interact with those data tables that we put on jupyter today in real time?
Yes, we can manipulate the data, but we read a copy in.  We are not manipulating the version that was on GitHub.

#### Will we eventually learn how to filter data in order to separate different names of data, or perform mathematical operations on the datasets?

Yes, all!

#### Can you show how to launch a book another day after we saved it and come back to it?

When you launch your server on the "home" tab you can click on the file name of a previously saved notebook to work on it again.

#### can you just put anything in the docstring?

Yes, technically, but you should follow good code style guidelines.

#### What would happen if we just call 'pd.read_csv(coffe_data_url)' instead of storing it in a variable and then call the variable?

It would print it out, but then you don't have a variable, so you would have to read it in again to be able to manipulate it.

#### What is considered scraped data?
Data that is pulled from websites automatically. We will do some web scraping starting this week.


### Questions we will answer in the rest of this week

- How to view a more detailed look of the data instead of it only showing the first and last few columns
- Could we retrieve data in all formats with one function?
- Can we access data like a 2d array?
- What is the function to check the unique values in a column?
